---
title: Notes on Integers
date: 2018-04-24
tags: ["Mathematics"]
---

 # Parity of Integer

## Sum & Subtraction
 - Like terms always results in an even integer.
    - E + E = E
    - E - E = E 
     - O + O = E
     - O - O = E
 - Unlike terms results in an odd  integer.
    - E + O = O
    - E - O = O

## Product
- As long as there is 1 even factor in a product of two factors, the product is always even.
    - E * E = E
    - E * O = E
- Both factor terms in a product must be odd for an odd factor.
    - O * O = O
- Any integer multiplied to even and the result multipled to any integer is always even.
    - X * E or O = E
- 2 mulitplied by whether odd or even integer always gives an even integer.
    - 2 * E = E
    - 2 * O = E

## Expression
- Use logical reasoning to deduce conditions of parity for individual terms in an expression.
- Use 4 case testing (use simple numbers 1, 2) method pluggging simple integers into an expression.
    1. Both P & Q are even.
    2. Both P & Q are odd.
    3. P is odd, Q is even.
    4. Q is odd, P is even.

# Factors

## Basics
- Factors of 12 are $$\set{1, 2, 3, 4,  6, 12}$$
- Multiples of 12 are $$\set{12, 24, 36, 72...}$$
- Visually:

<pre>
        72
        |
        36          Multiple zone
        |
        24 
  ------|-------
        12
        /  \
       2    6       Factor zone
      / \    / \
     2  3  2  3 
</pre>
- Theorem: Every integer greater than 1 can be represented as a product of prime numbers. 
- Prime number is an integer greater than 1 whose factors are 1 and itself only.
- Prime number can be divided without remainder (i.e. evenly) by either 1 and itself only.
- 2 is the only even prime.
- All primes except 2 are odd.
- Common primes < 60: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, 41, 43, 47, 53, 59
- Equivalent statements:
    - r is factor of Q
    - r is divisior of Q
    - Q is divisible by r
    - Q is multiple of r
- Product, subtraction or sum of two multiples of an integer always gives its another multiple.

## GCF and LCM

- GCF of A and B is the product of highest common prime factors present in both terms.
- If, $$ A = NY; B = NX $$ (where N is the GCF of A and B) then $$ LCM = X * Y * N $$
- $$ LCM=\frac{AB}{GCF} $$

# Count of Factors
Let, $$ N = 2^5.3^2.7 $$
Here, $$\set{5,2,1}$$ are the exponents.
Adding 1 to each exponent we get, $$\set{6,3,2}$$
Multiplying each new terms, we get, $$6.3.2=36$$ which is the total number of factors of N
Multiplying each corresponding new term of odd prime factors (pf 3 and 7), we get $$3.2=6$$ which is the number of odd factors of N

# Divisibility of Large Integers

- For 4, last 2 digits must be divisible by 4.
- For 3, sum of digits must be divisible by 3.
- For 9, sum of digits must be divisible by 9.
- For 5, last digit must be divisible by 5.
- For 6, must be divisible by both 2 and 3.

# Integer-Quotient Equation
D = Dividend; S = Divisor; Q = Quotient; r = Remainder
- $$\frac{D}{S}=Q+\frac{r}{S}$$
- $$D=SQ+r$$